# Queen Maud Land ice shelves

### Eisermann, H., Eagles, G., Ruppel, A., Smith, E. C., & Jokat, W. (2020). Bathymetry beneath ice shelves of western Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica, and implications on ice shelf stability. Geophysical Research Letters, 47, e2019GL086724. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GL086724
This source examines a newly created model of the Western Dronning Maud Land (wDML) bathymetry, derived from a gravity inversion conducted over the area, and constrained by seismic, multibeam, radar, and magnetic data in the area, offering a more thorough and accurate model than many predating it (Eisermann, Eagles, Ruppel, Smith, & Jokat, 2020). This paper is of note for several reasons; unlike the work done by Smith et al (2020), the surveying conducted here is not restricted to Ekström, and includes Jelbart, Fimbul, and other ice shelves in wDML. Moreover, it corroborates that paper’s findings that the data used in BedMap2, a leading dataset in the field, is highly inaccurate; they found that water cavity depths are underestimated by 63% on the whole (Eisermann et al, 2020). Analyzing the bathymetry, they found that the seabed consistently exhibited deep troughs with small highs, again similar to the conclusions of Smith et al (2020). The researchers note the shallow continental shelf, but point out that sills (land formations left behind by glaciers during movement) are helping to prevent the entry of circumpolar deepwater into the water columns beneath the wDML ice shelves (Eisermann et al, 2020). They note that a more pressing concern may be increasing water temperatures, particularly in the Fimbul area, where heated Antarctic Surface Water (ASW) has begun to interact with the ice shelf (Eisermann et al, 2020).
 
### Hammer, C., Ohrnberger, M., & Schlindwein, V. (2015). Pattern of cryospheric seismic events observed at Ekström Ice Shelf, Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters, 42, 3936–3943. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015GL064029
This source discusses an experiment analyzing seismic signals generated in the Ekström ice shelf using a new intelligent detection model. Calving events (where large chunks around the edge of a glacier), sliding at the ice-bed interface, and ice fracturing generate the most common signals, but there are difficulties distinguishing these signals from ones caused by tectonic activity (Hammer, Öhrnberger, & Schlindwein, 2015). As such, by using a Hidden Markov Model-based algorithm, the team was able to classify with much greater precision what was occurring over an 11-month period. Results were verified by viewing 4 days across the period in greater detail to determine model accuracy, which was quite high, as the algorithm missed only 7% of events and detected 2% false positives (Hammer et al, 2015). Furthermore, the results show that arctic icequakes are correlated with the tides, which create stresses on floating ice structures when they change, eventually leading to fractures in the ice. These fractures are subsequently filled in by seawater. This model of events is called the hybrid model, and the findings of this study support that model over alternative explanations (Hammer et al, 2015). This article’s discussion of cryospheric seismology raises an interesting avenue for the analysis of ice flow and ice sheet behavior, and pushes its possibilities further with its model. It also illustrates how the Ekström ice shelves, as well as others, are subject to stresses caused by tides, a conclusion not fully established before this paper’s publishing, and one which raises questions; what happens if circumpolar deepwater begins circulating in these fractures?

### Hattermann, T., O. A. Nøst, J. M. Lilly, and L. H. Smedsrud (2012), Two years of oceanic observations below the Fimbul Ice Shelf, Antarctica, Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L12605, doi:10.1029/2012GL051012.
This paper explores a study conducted by looking at data from 3 ocean moorings underneath the Fimbul Ice Shelf. It maintains that the water underneath the Fimbul Ice Shelf is actually fairly close to the surface freezing temperature, warmer only by 0.1 degrees Celsius (Hattermann, Nøst, Lilly, & Smedsrud, 2012). Although they did note warm deep water in the area, Hattermann et al suggest that its ability to fully enter the cavity underneath the Ice Shelf is actually quite constrained (2012). They ultimately posit that CDW cannot be considered the singular driving force for basal melting and increased temperatures at the Ice Shelf, as surface water and solar forcing are also major driving forces thereof (Hattermann et al, 2012). There is thusly a multi-faceted interplay occurring to cause basal melting.
 
### Humbert A, Steinhage D, Helm V, et al. On the link between surface and basal structures of the Jelbart Ice Shelf, Antarctica. Journal of Glaciology. 2015;61(229):975-986. doi:10.3189/2015JoG15J023
Humbert et al explore a survey of the Jelbart Ice Shelf, synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) data as well as laser scanning (2015). This paper is relevant to the discussion as it mentions features of the Jelbart Ice Shelf, most clearly that there are many stripes in the surface imagery, significant as they correspond to crevasses in the bed, and discusses an interesting method of attempting to understand the ice shelf base (Humbert et al, 2015). By combining the radar data with laser scanning, Humbert et al were able to achieve a result with small horizontal range, but with high resolution vertically (2015). Their conclusion ultimately is that “mapping the surface of ice shelves using radar imagery thus gives useful information about the nature of the basal topography,” which brings up an interesting new form of modeling compared to using gravity inversions or other such methods (Humbert et al, 2015). Another interesting point that Humbert et al make is that the timescale of the formation of these features is much greater than previously thought; it occurs over at least decades, and possibly centuries (Humbert et al, 2015). This means that ice sheet models may be inaccurately predicting features of the sheet and shelves as they are assuming formation and shape changes on a timescale that is faster than is realistic, and future models should attempt to correct for this.
 
### Smith, E. C., Hattermann, T., Kuhn, G., Gaedicke, C., Berger, S., Drews, R., et al. (2020). Detailed seismic bathymetry beneath Ekström Ice Shelf, Antarctica: Implications for glacial history and ice-ocean interaction. Geophysical Research Letters, 47, e2019GL086187. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GL086187
These researchers describe a recent model of the bathymetry below the Ekström ice shelf, created through vibroseis seismic reflection surveys. This method differs from ground/ice-penetrating radar in that it doesn’t use electromagnetic waves and instead uses mechanical waves made by trucks, which can transmit through water, unlike radar. They posit that this method is the most accurate compared to others in mapping the bathymetry under ice shelves, including gravity inversions (Smith et al, 2020). They point out that under the Ekström ice shelf, they have mapped significantly different bathymetry than other leading models, like BedMap 2.point out that the bathymetry beneath Ekström is significantly lower than previously thought, meaning that the shelf is much more exposed to circumpolar deepwater (CDW) than previously thought. As the continental shelf in the Dronning Maud Land is quite narrow (meaning that the area where the bed of the ice sheet becomes the sea floor is very steep), the entire area is quite susceptible to CDW, and is highly susceptible to future change (Smith et al, 2020). Smith et al also maintain that this area is of interest because the water flow in the area affects water properties and mass in much larger ice shelves in Western Antarctica (2020). They feel that the characteristics found under Ekström are likely consistent with most others in the area, and highlight the need for further seismic reflection surveys and a much deeper understanding of seabed cavities underneath ice shelves. An additional piece of information of note is that this model seems to be fairly deterministic, rather than stochastic, which is quite different from our purposes.
